PEP 781: Make ``TYPE_CHECKING`` a built-in constant (#4318)
python/peps: peps/pep-0781.rst

PEP: 781
Title: Adding __type_checking__ constant
Author: Inada Naoki <songofacandy@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/85728
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Created: 24-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History: `11-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/76766>`__,
              `24-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/85728>`__,

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes adding a new keyword, :data:`!__type_checking__`, to improve
the experience of writing Python code with type annotations. It is evaluated
as ``True`` when the code is being analyzed by a static type checker, and as
``False`` during normal runtime execution. Unlike :data:`typing.TYPE_CHECKING`,
which this keyword replaces, it does not require an import statement, and
creates the opportunity for compiler optimizations, such as smaller bytecode.

Motivation
==========

Type annotations were defined for Python by :pep:`484`, and have enjoyed
widespread adoption. A challenge with fully-annotated code is that many
more imports are required in order to bring the relevant name into scope,
potentially causing import cycles without careful design. This has been

> recognized by :pep:`563` and later :pep`649`, which introduce two different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
recognized by :pep:`563` and later :pep:`649`, which introduce two different
```

> mechanisms for deferred evaluation of type annotations. As :pep:`!563` notes,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mechanisms for deferred evaluation of type annotations. As PEP 563 notes,
```

PEP: 781

> Title: Make ``TYPE_CHECKING`` builtin

Reviewer 2: Grammar:
```suggestion
Title: Make ``TYPE_CHECKING`` a built-in variable
```

I think saying 'constant' is also fine here, as we mean the colloquial definition (very few things are truly constant in Python), but up to you:

```suggestion
Title: Make ``TYPE_CHECKING`` a built-in constant
```

Author: Inada Naoki <songofacandy@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/85728
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Created: 24-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History: `11-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/76766>`__,
              `24-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/85728>`__,

Abstract
========

> This PEP proposes adding a new builtin, :data:`!TYPE_CHECKING`, to improve

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This PEP proposes adding a new built-in variable, :data:`!TYPE_CHECKING`, to improve
```

the experience of writing Python code with type annotations. It is evaluated
as ``True`` when the code is being analyzed by a static type checker, and as
``False`` during normal runtime execution. Unlike :data:`typing.TYPE_CHECKING`,

> which this keyword replaces, it does not require an import statement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which this variable replaces, it does not require an import statement.
```

Motivation
==========

Type annotations were defined for Python by :pep:`484`, and have enjoyed
widespread adoption. A challenge with fully-annotated code is that many
more imports are required in order to bring the relevant name into scope,
potentially causing import cycles without careful design. This has been
recognized by :pep:`563` and later :pep:`649`, which introduce two different

> mechanisms for deferred evaluation of type annotations. As :pep:`563` notes,

Reviewer 2: PEP 563 was linked in the previous sentence, so stylistically it might be preferable to avoid this link?
```suggestion
mechanisms for deferred evaluation of type annotations. As PEP 563 notes,
```

like ``if False:  # TYPE_CHECKING``. Providing a standard method will allow
many tools to implement the same behavior consistently. It will also allow
third-party tools in the ecosystem to standardize on a single behavior
with guaranteed semantics, as for example some static type checkers currently
do not permit local constants, only recognizing ``typing.TYPE_CHECKING``.

Specification
=============

``TYPE_CHECKING`` is a built-in constant and its value is ``False``.
Unlike ``True``, ``False``, ``None``, and ``__debug__``, ``TYPE_CHECKING`` is
not a real constant; assigning to it will not raise a ``SyntaxError``.

Static type checkers must treat ``TYPE_CHECKING`` as ``True``, similar to
:data:`typing.TYPE_CHECKING`.

If this PEP is accepted, the new ``TYPE_CHECKING`` constant will be
the preferred approach, instead of the existing ``typing.TYPE_CHECKING``.
However, ``typing.TYPE_CHECKING`` will not be deprecated in the foreseeable
future.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Since ``TYPE_CHECKING`` doesn't prohibit assignment, existing code using
``TYPE_CHECKING`` will continue to work.

.. code-block:: python

>    # These code will work as before

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   # This code will continue to work
```

   TYPE_CHECKING = False
   from typing import TYPE_CHECKING

> User can remove the assingment to ``TYPE_CHECKING`` after they stop using

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
User can remove the assignment to ``TYPE_CHECKING`` after they stop using
```

> Python before 3.14.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python 3.13 or older versions.
```

How to Teach This
=================

* Use ``if TYPE_CHECKING:`` for skipping type-checking code at runtime.
* Use ``from typing import TYPE_CHECKING`` to support Python versions before 3.14.
* Workarounds like ``TYPE_CHECKING = False`` or ``if False:  # TYPE_CHECKING``

>   are continued to work, but not recommended.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  will continue to work, but are not recommended.
```

Reference Implementation
========================

* `python/cpython#131793 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/131793>`__

Rejected Ideas
==============

> Eliminate type-checking-only Code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eliminate type-checking-only code
```

PEP: 781
Title: Adding __type_checking__ constant
Author: Inada Naoki <songofacandy@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/85728
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Created: 24-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes adding a new keyword ``__type_checking__`` that serves the

> same purpose as ``typing.TYPE_CHECKING``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
same purpose as :data:`typing.TYPE_CHECKING`.
```

Reviewer 4: Also I think it would be great to link to the keyword definition:

```rst
This PEP proposes adding a new ``__type_checking__`` :ref:`keyword <python:keywords>` that serves the
```

This constant is ``True`` when the code is being analyzed by a static type
checker, and ``False`` during normal runtime execution.

Motivation
==========

For libraries that may be used in scripts where startup time is critical,
the time taken to import the ``typing`` module cannot be ignored.

To avoid importing ``typing``, developers currently define a module-level
variable ``TYPE_CHECKING = False`` or use code like
``if False:  # TYPE_CHECKING``.
Providing a standard method will allow many tools to implement the same
behavior consistently.

Furthermore, this allows compilers to eliminate type-checking-only code at
compile time. This reduces bytecode size and memory usage,
and would help with writing type-hinted code for memory-constrained
environments like WASM or micropython.

Specification
=============

``__type_checking__`` is a keyword and its value is ``False``.
It can be used in the same way as ``False``, except it can not be used as
a matching pattern.

> Similar to typing.TYPE_CHECKING, type checking tools should treat
> ``__type_checking__`` as True.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to :data:`typing.TYPE_CHECKING`, type checking tools should treat
``__type_checking__`` as ``True``.
```

Rationale
=========

Difference from ``__debug__``
-----------------------------

``__debug__`` is not a keyword, but a built-in constant.
Not adding a new keyword is attractive, but it requires special handling in
both the compiler and the runtime to change the value of the constant
depending on the startup option.

By implementing ``__type_checking__`` the same way as ``False``,
we avoid the need for special handling in both the compiler and runtime.
Therefore, making it a keyword is the simpler approach.

How to teach this
=================

Add this note to the ``typing.TYPE_CHECKING`` document:

> If you don't want to import ``typing``, you can use ``__type_checking__``.

> > Workaround like ``TYPE_CHECKING = False`` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Workarounds like ``TYPE_CHECKING = False`` or
```

> ``if False:  # TYPE_CHECKING`` are not recommended since Python 3.14.

> Resources
> =========
> 
> * Previous discussion: https://discuss.python.org/t/76766
> * Reference Implementation: https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/131641

Reviewer: We can put the previous discussion under Post-History in the header (please add the current discussion thread there too), and then use this section for Reference Implementation:

```suggestion
Reference Implementation
========================

* `python/cpython#131641 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/131641>`__
```

Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/85728
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Created: 24-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History: `11-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/76766>`__

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes adding a new keyword ``__type_checking__`` that serves the
same purpose as :data:`typing.TYPE_CHECKING`.
This constant is ``True`` when the code is being analyzed by a static type
checker, and ``False`` during normal runtime execution.

Motivation
==========

For libraries that may be used in scripts where startup time is critical,
the time taken to import the ``typing`` module cannot be ignored.

To avoid importing ``typing``, developers currently define a module-level
variable ``TYPE_CHECKING = False`` or use code like
``if False:  # TYPE_CHECKING``.
Providing a standard method will allow many tools to implement the same
behavior consistently.

Furthermore, this allows compilers to eliminate type-checking-only code at
compile time. This reduces bytecode size and memory usage,
and would help with writing type-hinted code for memory-constrained
environments like WASM or micropython.

Rationale
=========

Using Keyword
-------------

> Avoiding the addition of a new :ref:`keyword <python:keywords>`
> (like :data:`__debug__`) would be attractive because more keywords means more
> complex language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Avoiding the addition of a new :ref:`keyword <python:keywords>`
(like :data:`__debug__`) would be attractive because more keywords means
a more complex language.
```

However, adding a constant without a keyword (like :data:`__debug__`) requires
special handling in both the compiler and runtime.

By implementing ``__type_checking__`` the same way as ``False``, we avoid the
need for the special handling.

> Therefore, making it a keyword is the simpler approach.

Reviewer 2: Does this allow for writing `__type_checking__ = False`, as discussed in Discourse?

Author: No. This prevents it.
Python <3.14 users should write like this:

```py
try:
    TYPE_CHECKING = __type_checking__  # since Python 3.14
except NameError:
    TYPE_CHECKING = False
```

Reviewer 5: Something like this (with or without the `Literal`) should also work:

```py
TYPE_CHECKING: Literal[True] = globals().get("__type_checking__", False)
```

Specification
=============

``__type_checking__`` is a :ref:`keyword <python:keywords>` and its value is
``False``.

> It can be used in the same way as ``False``, except it can not be used as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can be used in the same way as ``False``, except it can notbe used as
```

a matching pattern.

> Similar to :data:`typing.TYPE_CHECKING`, type checking tools should treat
> ``__type_checking__`` as ``True``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Static type checkers must treat ``__type_checking__`` as ``True``,
similar to :data:`typing.TYPE_CHECKING`.
```

> Once this PEP is accepted, ``__type_checking__`` will be the preferred way over
> ``typing.TYPE_CHECKING``. However, ``typing.TYPE_CHECKING`` will not be deprecated.
> Instead, it will be implemented using ``__type_checking__``, allowing future type
> checkers to focus on handling ``__type_checking__`` only.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If this PEP is accepted, ``__type_checking__`` will be the preferred approach,
instead of ``typing.TYPE_CHECKING``. However, ``typing.TYPE_CHECKING`` will not
be deprecated.
Instead, it will be implemented as ``TYPE_CHECKING = __type_checking__``,
allowing future type checkers to focus on only handling ``__type_checking__``.
```

PEP: 781
Title: Adding __type_checking__ constant
Author: Inada Naoki <songofacandy@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/85728
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Created: 24-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14

> Post-History: `11-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/76766>`__,
>               `24-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/85728>`__,
> Post-History: `11-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/76766>`__

Reviewer: Remove duplicate:
```suggestion
Post-History: `11-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/76766>`__,
              `24-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/85728>`__,
```
